in the very heart of the fortress lives
the queen
she produces a thousand eggs a day to
provide fresh recruits for the teams of
gardeners and masons and the ranks of
the army
she resides in a special chamber which
the workers renovate and adapt to
accommodate her growing bulk after a
year or two she is in effect to
prisoners for she is far too big to
squeeze through the corridors that lead
to her residence but that is of no
consequence
she's so bloated with egg producing
machinery that she couldn't move even if
she wanted to and her eggs as she
produces them are carried away to the
nurseries by the attentive and
indefatigable workers there are a
million and a half insects in this one
colony they and their gardens generate a
lot of heat within this enclosed
building the air could easily become
foul and hot the fungus and therefore
the colony itself would die if the
temperature varies by more than two
degrees from 31 degrees centigrade but
the colony has a solution and it's an
architectural work this six feet beneath
the surface of the earth is the center
of the colony its floor its study with
shafts that go down 12 14 feet down to
the water table where the worth of
termites can gather moist mud to carry
on their building and its ceiling is a
great plate which carries the entire
weight of the colony but on its
underside is what I think is really the
most remarkable animal structure I've
ever seen lines of concentric veins they
are made of mud and they absorb moisture
from the colony above and as it
evaporates it leaves this crustacean of
white salts on but more important that
as it evaporates it cools so that this
the cellar is much the coolest part
[Music]
and it's this that drives the air
conditioning the air continuously heated
by all the activity in the middle of the
building rises up into the upper stories
but this basement
thanks to these veins is many degrees
colder and it draws down the stale warm
air from the colony above down long
chimneys which go right round the edge
of the cellar as it does so there's a
seepage of gas through porous dimples
and the walls oxygen flows in and carbon
dioxide out so the mixture approximates
to fresh air
so these spires and turrets are key
elements in an air conditioning system
of a near-perfect mansion that has start
walls to protect its inhabitants from
the elements and from their enemies deep
dungeons where they can gather moisture
space inside for barns where they can
store their food and gardens where they
can grow their crops and yet all this
was built by tiny insects with minut
brains working in total cooperation in
the complete darkness we might like to
think that we are the most accomplished
architects that the world has ever seen
but if this was built in human terms
with every worker termite the size of me
then it would stand a mile high and we
haven't done that yet
you